---
title: Teaching
summary: Teaching etc.
date: ""
authors: []
type: ""

# Optional header image (relative to `static/img/` folder).
header:
  caption: ""
  image: ""
---
## Teaching Philosophy Statement

Teaching bestows the opportunity to create societal impact. Teachers have the power to inspire the next generation of learners to set bold goals and enable them to achieve these goals. My desire to teach biological sciences (neuroscience) at the undergraduate level originated when I was a Masters student in India and was given the opportunity to conduct workshops for my peers and juniors. I caught myself emulating some of the very same teachers that inspired me to follow a scientific career path. As I reflect on mythis and other experiences that I have had since then, I am reminded of two things, the joy that teaching brings me and the immense influence that teachers can have on their students’ lives.
 
As a teacher, I aim to use backward design for developing course curricula that encourage a shift from surface learning to deep learning. Accordingly, I believe my responsibility as an instructor is to not only deliver the content but also provide a conceptual framework and train students to identify appropriate resources and strategies to build upon this framework. While it is important that the course content exposes students to field-specific terminology and concepts, it is crucial that the course design supports the transfer of their understanding of concepts to different contexts. Occasionally, I take this one step further and include activities that support the transfer of students’ understanding to different target audiences as well. For instance, as a guest lecturer for a Psychology course at Goucher College, I conducted a ‘comic strip’ activity towards the end of a session on Classical Conditioning. For this activity, students broke into four groups and were asked to sketch a 3-panel comic strip (Before Conditioning, During Conditioning and After Conditioning) of a given example of classical conditioning. They applied what they had learned from reading assignments and class discussions and translated a complex classical conditioning example (fear learning, taste-aversion learning, eyeblink conditioning or salivary conditioning) into a product appropriate for a non-expert audience. This activity not only encouraged collaborative work and creativity but also served as formative assessment. Its success convinced the instructor to consider including this activity in future iterations of the course.

The expressions, ‘Tell me and I forget, teach me and I remember, involve me and I learn’ and ‘Nothing is more effective for learning than trying to teach it to someone else’ encapsulate how I conceptualize learning. With these principles in mind, I try to incorporate innovative active learning strategies in every course session and use peer instruction exercises whenever suitable. As a Collaborative Teaching Fellow (teaching intern) at Goucher College, I facilitated four journal club-style class sessions that together formed a major component of the Biochemistry of Gene Expression course. For each of these sessions, students worked in groups and presented an assigned subset of data figures from the selected article to the rest of the class. They subsequently posted explanations of the figures assigned to them on an online ‘wiki’ that could be accessed by the entire class. The discussions that ensued among students would have been difficult to orchestrate had I been the one explaining the data figures. Students did most of the talking during the class session itself but received feedback from me on the explanations that they posted online.  

One of the biggest challenges that teachers often face is keeping the students engaged in content, in-class learning activities, and flipped classroom assignments. As a learner, I have identified several factors that led me to disengage from a class session. I have made a mental note of addressing these factors as an instructor. The issues primarily stemmed from a lack of (a) clarity on the expectations and responsibilities, (b) communication regarding the learning objectives and utility value of a class session, (c) inclusive teaching practices, or (d) consequences for students who do not attempt flipped classroom assignments. As an instructor, I seek to use several strategies for enhancing student engagement in class. I establish relevance by connecting subject matter to everyday applications or current issues and events, and by providing various perspectives. I give students some freedom with selecting topics or articles for assignments. In my experience as an instructor for the Medical Neuroscience Discussion Group, students seemed more enthusiastic about presenting papers that they had chosen for themselves. In addition to active learning exercises, I use a variety of instructional tools (videos, whiteboard illustrations, 3-D models, etc.) to keep the pace of a class session dynamic. These tools were especially helpful when I taught the Nervous System and Special Senses lab course online for Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine in the COVID era. 

To assess (and facilitate) student learning, I have used at least two different techniques in the past. The first one, Knowledge, Connection, and Application (KCA) Assessment, a quiz on flipped-classroom reading assignments, was designed along with Dr. McCabe for her Psychology course at Goucher College. Students answered a 5-item KCA-assessment during the first ten minutes of the class. During the first few minutes they responded to the items from memory, and the rest of the time they used their notes and books to complete the assessment. Immediately after they turned in their assessments, we spent a few minutes discussing the answers. This technique worked well for a small class size and allowed me to determine which topics needed more emphasis during the class period. On the other hand, the Defining Features Matrix clicker-based activity that I conducted as a Teaching-as-Research Fellow for a Psychopharmacology course worked effectively despite a large class size. Overall, I aim to align assessments with learning objectives and make use of rubrics while grading, for clarity and fairness. I try to provide immediate (especially for formative assessments) and positive feedback on student performance with the goal of cultivating a growth mindset. 

To assess my teaching, I have requested student feedback as well as peer observation from colleagues in the past. These approaches have been immensely beneficial for determining my weaknesses. I hope to continue addressing these shortcomings with practice and by attending pedagogical training workshops and conferences on evidence-based teaching that have been helpful so far.

I strive to model positive behavior in the classroom to build a culture of trust, fairness and mutual respect and create a safe environment for all students to explore, ask questions, make mistakes, and improve. Ultimately, I hope for my students to understand the scientific method, develop healthy skepticism and an analytical worldview, irrespective of whether they are specializing in the subjects that I teach.
